Title: Computationally Efficient Models for RR Lyrae Variable Stars

Abstract: RR Lyrae (RRL) are a class of periodic variable stars which exhibit a very small spread in luminosity at visible wavelengths and a weak but tight period-luminosity relation at ultraviolet, making them useful distance indicators. Discovery of RR Lyrae in the Milky Way halo offers the potential to trace the location of halo substructures such as stellar clouds and streams in three-dimensional space. Ongoing and upcoming multi--filter surveys such as Pan-STARRS, DES, and LSST will produce large time domain data sets of objects in the Milky Way halo. Finding and characterizing RR Lyrae in these data sets is challenging, especially for surveys such as Pan-STARRS and DES which have sparse temporal coverage. We present a new model for RR Lyrae stars constructed using densely time sampled RR Lyrae found by SDSS in Stripe 82. The resulting model is parsimonious (few free parameters) and computationally efficient to fit to new light curves, making it well suited for surveys such as Pan-STARRS and DES. We demonstrate the ability of the model to estimate periods for RR Lyrae detected by Pan-STARRS and discuss how the model can be used to find RR Lyrae among large sets of light curves using goodness-of-fit statistics.



Title: Near Field Cosmology with RR Lyrae Variable Stars

Abstract: RR Lyrae (RRL) are a class of periodic variable stars. Discovery of RRL in the Milky Way halo provides evidence for existence of satellite galaxies. Thus RRL may be used to solve the missing satellites problem in near field cosmology in which the number of observed Milky Way satellites is smaller than that predicted by cosmological simulations. Ongoing and upcoming multi--filter surveys such as Pan-STARRS, DES, and LSST will produce large time domain data sets of objects in the Milky Way halo. Finding and characterizing RRL in these data sets is challenging, especially for Pan-STARRS and DES which have sparse temporal coverage. We present a new model for RRL stars constructed using densely time sampled RRL found by SDSS in Stripe 82. The resulting model is parsimonious (few free parameters) and computationally efficient to fit to new light curves, making it well suited for surveys such as Pan-STARRS and DES. We demonstrate the ability of the model to estimate periods for RRL detected by Pan-STARRS and discuss how the model can be used to find RRL among large sets of light curves using goodness-of-fit statistics.
